Hello everyone. Welcome to the Bay Area
content marketing meetup. Today we're
talking the AI search optimization
roadmap with Alita Ciss. Ala is an
international SEO consultant and founder
of I hope I pronounced this right or
Orienti.
Uh Elena's created a 10-step AI search
content optimization checklist. She's
going to cover the importance of each
approach in the checklist, how to take
action, and examples of how to move
forward and what to avoid. You'll learn
the key differences between traditional
and AI search and the steps to take to
maximize your content visibility in AI
search platforms. Elena, thanks for
joining and take it away.
>> Thank you very much for the opportunity.
I'm very happy to be able to share with
all of you today. Um I'm not going to
expand uh a lot on my background but yes
I am a an SEO consultant. I have my own
SEO consultancy. I work with clients
everywhere in the world and uh I have
been doing SEO since 2007. So I have
been able to see the evolution of Google
and search uh through the years as well
and I also have created quite a few
resources regarding SEO and AI search
which I will share at the very end of
the presentation and hopefully will be
also useful for all to all of you to
also keep learning and enhancing
expanding the your your AI search uh and
SEO knowledge in general. uh you will
see that I have quite a bit uh in in the
presentation. I have uh a few tools uh a
few checklists, some are free, some some
are paid um a few examples, resources
and so on. Uh I will be sharing the
slides at the end of the presentation.
So no worries if you cannot uh keep up
and and get screenshots or notes of
everything because you will have the
presentation at the end uh anyway. And
uh I want to start with a little bit of
a sorry here uh frustration uh based on
all of what I hear and see especially in
social media. I am very active in
LinkedIn. I have more than 100k uh
followers there. So I post every day
regarding SEO and AI search and um like
every other uh post in LinkedIn uh is
unfortunately lately about how SEO Z or
SEOs even arguing if we should call
ourselves SEOs with with AI search um or
something else like AI search optimizer
go or llo or there are so many acronyms
right uh realistically I have to say
that um a A lot of these posts come from
people who have uh interest let's say in
this. So many of these are AI uh
specialists who want to piggyback and
and maximize let's say the opportunities
uh in into their fields. In other cases
these are nonspecialized publications.
Interesting enough, I was actually
interview for this New York uh magazine
h article there and and it is pretty
much clickbait the head in the title
because if you read actually read the
article you will see that uh for example
my take on the take of all the
specialists who were interviewing the
piece mentioned how things were shifting
evolving but SEO was not the same. So
speaking so much about uh something that
is like uh I don't know uh the the the
the type of of approaches in order to
get clicks at the end of the day
somehow. But yes, there's that. Uh the
reality though is that there's a shift
of course but we need to um have a
balanced approach um taking context into
account in order to make investment in
an ROI positive way in a way that
actually makes sense in our own context
right um I actually just literally
yesterday ended um a survey uh asking
search specialists and digital marketers
all over who through my newsletter I
have a an SEO newsletter that is called
SEO like news weekly news newsletter.
It's completely free and more than 200
people answered the survey and I wanted
to gather
what is the take and and the status and
the state of things beyond of what I
know firsthand and I and I see directly
with my clients, right? And when I asked
about if the clients of this SEOs who
took and digital marketers who took the
survey uh had asked about the company's
AI search visibility in the last year
and 91% of the answers were positive
which doesn't surprise me because I see
it with my clients directly as well. Uh
and then funnily enough regarding all of
these different new acronyms and how do
we decide to call ourselves uh most of
the answers were that uh this decision
makers at the end uh refer to AI search
optimization like that AI search
optimization rather than an acronym or
just SEO for AI platforms as well. So
there's definitely that regarding what
acronym to use but there's an obvious
interest right. So it's important to
tackle it in a factual database way. And
here's data from similar web. They
literally track uh all of the the the
websites activity uh not only search but
in general any analy it's like pretty
much like benchmark uh platforms to to
perform benchmark across different
websites and apps and um in to assess
which are the channels that are bringing
more how how they are performing and so
on and if we take a look at the data
there we can see that LLMs are expanding
not killing search as a discovery
channel first because 95% of Chad Gupt
users also use Google right so it's not
that they have shifted and stopped using
one for the others no uh LLMs have
opened up a new opportunities and and
types and intents of of queries that we
were not used to ask in the past because
it's a new interface new new
functionalities as well uh new ways to
provide uh information that is being
used in different ways. So despite the
chip growth that has been impressive,
Google is still the search king with 14x
the visits, right? Yes, the growth of
Chpt has been uh huge and is already the
top 10 among the top 10 websites in the
world, but it's still point 5.8 billion
visits in August versus the 83.8
billion visits of Google. Uh so yes
there's definitely that it's not that
Google is dying just because of LLMs
also something important to highlight
here LLMs um like JBT and and so on or
Gemini
and their answers also rely a lot on
grounding when current factual
information is needed. So when we search
for something for which we need
up-to-date information uh the answer
won't be sourced from the pre-training
data of the AI platform. Uh this is
mostly used for general knowledge. Uh so
what is the capital of um
Spain? Yeah, Madrid the LLMs already
have already uh integrated in their
training data. But if I want something
factual like what is the um weather
right now in San Francisco at at this
time and what are the expectations in
next six hours it's very likely that for
this sort of questions uh LLMs will make
use of something that is called grunding
uh which is pretty much connecting to
search mode through the APIs that they
have with their own services in the case
of Google Gemini they they go and take a
look at the the the the index AI mode.
go and take a look at the pages that
already ranking uh for these queries in
traditional search to provide them
provide them and wrap and and synthesize
uh in another format but they rely on
this information that they have in the
index in the case of chajipt that is
what they they have an integration and
agreement with Microsoft/being
right so they go beyond their static
memory to retrieve real-time external
information using it as a as grounding
to validate that they producing accurate
up-to-date answers right so this means
that SEO is still vital for it because
uh JPT pretty much rely still rely a lot
on this integration with traditional
search let's say for their answers in
fact something that I confirm some time
ago a couple of months ago as you can
see here on the screen this u on the
right is a blog post from my own site uh
I I did a few tests and I confirm I
tested and validated that that chap chap
GPT was using Google SER snippets uh the
snippets in the from the search results
for its answers. A lot of people in the
SEO sector and community were like no no
this cannot be possible. Why will they
do that if they have being integration?
Uh well maybe because of accuracy a
wider richer index that Google tends to
to have. Um and then surprise surprise
then a few weeks ago you can see the the
the screenshot here to the left. It was
a coverage or research that was done by
the information that was then reproduced
by a lot of different uh publications
here showcasing how it was yeah it was a
knowledge that chat GPT was using Google
search to answer their their their
questions indeed. So there's definitely
that. So SEO is not that just evolving.
But here's here's the biggest question,
right? Is traditional SEO SEO as we have
been doing in latest years enough to
succeed in AIR platforms? Um
Google spoke people. They have people
who are in charge speaking to the
community. They do an amazing work by
the way given the circumstances and
restrictions that they have being the
the the the spoke people to the
community. So there's only so much that
they can they can say um otherwise what
they say might end up uh being
manipulated at the end of the day
unfortunately. Uh but Danny Sullivan
who's one of those specialists was
speaking at Warham uh US Portland in
Portland um a few days ago and he had
this presentation about the state of SEO
SEO and in one of the slides he
mentioned and explained that good SEO is
good is good geo or whatever we want to
call it for AI search optimization which
I completely agree as you might have
imagined based on my previous slides But
I also want to ask is is that enough?
Good SEO? Yes, it's good. But is that
enough to continue doing what we have
been doing to maximize our chances to
rank as well as we can or to be
showcased as well as we can, right? So
let's see what changes with AI search
realistically and how can we enhance and
maximize uh our chances through
optimization shifts uh that we can put
in in place um in order to yeah give the
visibility to our brands that they
deserve in AI search platforms on one
hand and for that I am going to share a
checklist and I will along with it
provide a few insights that I learned
with the answers to the survey that I
just showcased. uh again and provide
also a little bit of a of the a
reference of what is going on in our
industry and there's a need a very
important need of a shift or to
prioritize something accordingly right
and maybe you can help uh along with
with that in your own teams uh or with
your own clients right so these are five
key areas of differences uh between AI
search and traditional search starting
with the search behavior with
traditional search it's true that people
had become much more sophisticated in
latest years. Um I remember when I
started doing SEO, people were searching
for two, three keywords. Not anymore.
Search become be became much more
sophisticated because people understood
that uh the results be become became
more accurate and better if they
provided more context around what what
they wanted. However, traditional search
was still relying a lot on short three,
four terms, keyword based one off with
high navigational intent, meaning that a
lot of those searches uh were about a
brand or wanting to go to a to a brand
site um in many re researches and and
and studies, it has been shown how
people like we are lazy in general and
rather than typing the address of the
website, they search for the website
came in Google as a as a as a bridge as
a door to go to the actual website. So
there's a lot of that then with AI
search uh more opportunities more
changes um became very very quickly
right like with uh long conversational
based multi-turn queries because it
incentivize a conversation um so it is
much more normal to not try trying to
look for definitive answers in just one
go. uh also there's a very high oriented
intent with uh traditional search we
classify intens or navigational to go to
websites or branded or um transactional
or at the very end of the user journey
uh of the conversion funeral or
commercial. But in in this case, we saw
a new intent um arising that was very
task oriented, searching for things that
we never searched for in traditional
search. So for example, uh please help
me creating a detailed six months
marketing automation road map for an
e-commerce website. So this is something
that is more than natural to ask to an
LLM uh to check GBT but is wasn't
something that we search for in
traditional search in Google. Right.
However, there's definitely an overlap
uh this like search searching for
something like marketing automation
roadmap for e-commerce sites. Yes. Or
learn marketing automation or just
searching for a hotspot for example.
This is more of the type of searches
that we saw with traditional search.
Then the another difference another
shift is the query handling where
traditional search we had single query
handling versus something that we call
fan out match in AI search. So the
single query match is that when we
search for an example content
optimization specialist and in in Google
traditional search we expected to see
pages that directly match that query
that will fulfill that query that
specific single query that we use right
now since uh AI platforms rely for
synthesis as a as an outcome for for the
the answer in order to ensure that their
answers as are as comprehensive as
possible when we search for something uh
they will generate different variations
of the query that we had included as an
input. So if the search prom is give me
beginner's battle tips, the CHBT will
generate many different variations of
those in trying to cover different
angles of the query and to connect my
requests with different type of contents
that they will be able to use to provide
a very accurate comprehensive and
complete uh answer based on those. So
the subqueries might be paddle advice
for new players or beginners paddle
mistakes or paddle surf techniques for
beginners or tip for for starting uh for
starting in paddle or paddle grip for
beginners. So as you can see all of them
are semantically related. Yes indeed of
course but they they they tackle and and
focus my need in different ways
different angles. So they can provide me
a a much more accurate answer than what
I had initially asked. Right. Um then
there's the other side of this coin,
right? Uh because I because of the the
what I was mentioning before with this
query handling single single query
versus find out match we have the page
versus passage level targeting and
optimization. Right? With traditional
search when we search with this keyword
beginner paddle tips for example what
Google will do was to look for pages
trying to target that need for that
query as much as possible in a
comprehensive way but at the page level
right so the whole body of the page
needed to be let's say as comprehensive
trying to answer this question uh in the
way in the way that was more more
accurate authoritative
in a very authoritative way also with
trustworthy information uh experience f
first as much as possible as well. So
not only relevant from a semantic
standpoint but that had all of these
characteristics that in SEO we call EAT
right like experience expertise
authoritiveness
uh that was also very easy to use and
consume etc right however in AI search
because the output are not pages that we
can click to go to but an answer that is
sensitized uh from many different pages
uh what they do is that when they
generate all of this
little subqueries or various subqueries
with the fan out technique that I
mentioned before. They will go and try
to find passages or or chunks of content
of text across many different pages that
satisfy that particular subquery. So for
example, this answer here about learning
the basics strokes uh in paddle,
prioritize control over power, etc. This
might come from two different pages that
have snippets or paragraph addressing
that particular uh topic doesn't connect
me with a single page. It provides
answers from many different pages.
Right? So um as you can see when you
highlight the sources in CHP like a
single paragraph outcome or or answer
might come from three from the data from
three different pages as well and and
how CHP has done this. Well trying to
find answers in passages in chunks of
texts that are in in these pages that
might be about something else uh in
general, right? they were mentioning
that particular topic at that level at
some level within their content, right?
And that is why it was matched authority
and popularity signals. Links versus
mentions, right? Is the links were was
the the the way that Google introduced
back in the day, not only to crawl and
to go from one page or or another to
discover more pages and information and
content, but also to uh gauge
popularity. uh one page uh one link from
one page to another was was seen as a as
a vote as an endorsement um
and well it became much more
sophisticated through the years that's
true but but yes that was mainly uh a
core popularity sen right and now with
AI search we have a new found weight and
importance to mentions and citations so
you don't necessarily need to attract
that link pointing to your site with a
very optimized anchor text or clickable
text as we always want it in SEO in
traditional search. uh but just a
mention or already matter. Of course, if
you ask me, I still prefer the link
because the link is not only a mention,
but it's it also passes me uh popularity
beyond than just a mention, but
mentions, citations, references of your
brand or what you do already have a
weight is already taken into account,
right? So, there's definitely that that
that shift as well. And finally the
results presentation ranked list of
pages versus synthesized answer. And
because of this difference in the
interface of course the engagement will
be will be different. The expectations
and the goals that uh we take into
account to assess success we can also
expect it to be different. So although
the principles as you can see remain
these differences create shifts in AI
versus traditional s optimization
practices that we need to take into
account. So from a crawability
standpoint, uh these are different
platforms and they have their own
crawlers, they have their own bots that
will try to get and obtain your
information. So you better have rules
that also allows them to access to your
content in case you want to be featured
in your answers because many CDNs and
many hosting by default will blocked
many times anything that is not Google
and the top three um search engines as
well. So there's there's this init
additional validation that we need to
take into account from an indexability
standpoint is has been uh confirmed
through different researches that um
unlike Google which has
so much time of evolution and experience
and sophisticated
>> they can render JavaScript they can see
the information that relies on on
clients that render JavaScript. This is
something that Chadypty crawlers cannot
do and other LLM crawlers are well as
well. So it's important that if we
overrely and we work with our
development team, we might as we sharing
a few tools to validate this quite
easily without going overly technical.
Uh but that we should assess as well in
case we are overrelying on client side
render JavaScript and just because of
that AI boats cannot see our content
unlike what Google can right relevance
because of the differences in user
search behaviors and intent to target.
Well, maybe we are leaving some um
opportunities out there by not targeting
certain type of topics and and and uh
and areas that are much more relevant to
to target because of the behavior that
our users have in AI search platforms.
popularity again the be a role of
thirdparty citations and mentions as
well that we need to take into account
and for example some of my clients have
decided to double down or invest a
little bit more in digital PR that
doesn't necessarily focus on bring it
the link but yes positive mentions and
in prominent um platforms and uh
prominent publications and finally the
metrics and goals to monitor visibility
and sentiment in the answer um as well
as traffic and sales of course But
unlike traditional search, we won't be
necessarily monitoring rankings per se
because they don't exist anymore. And um
the a much more direct connection to
traffic in this time. It might me it
might take longer to see the impact in
traffic as well because of the type of
satisfactions that users will tend to
get from the answers of LLMs as well. So
how much should you invest in I search
then then is about the alignment with
the current SEO actions that you have in
your organizations. the goals impact
versus efforts and I I asked a few
questions here that I think is um
healthy to ask reasonable to ask about
how much are AI platforms already
bringing to your traffic revenue and
impacting marketing goals how AI search
behavior differ from traditional search
what your visibility and traffic from
relevant uh queries to target versus
competitors maybe you don't have much to
do because you have been doing such a
great job in SEO and you you're the lead
the brand leader into sectors like the
gap and the needs right now um it's it's
minimum right so what's the growth
opportunity realistically and and how's
your content already optimized for
relevant AI search queries and based on
all of that uh what's then there up for
you to to to take and to grow
accordingly and what will be the ROI for
these additional efforts and are they
worthy to prioritize accordingly right
so to answer all of this let's go
through this road map with a few
examples, a few resources. So you can
see that there are tools all out there
that are able to provide um information
regarding all of uh all of these
validations to be done along with the
results of the state of AI search
optimization search survey to see how
we're already doing. Uh this survey was
had 211 responses and most who responded
were whether SEO specialists or SEO
managers or leads. uh most of them work
in house and have quite a bit of
experience because uh 32% of the answers
came from people who already have more
than 15 years of experience and 27% from
10 to 15 uh years. So yes, these are
experienced uh SEOs and digital
marketers. So the first step will be to
research and assess AI search audience
behavior to see how it differs from
traditional search to identify the
topics to target and prioritize
accordingly as uh of course for this you
can uh use AI search platforms um AI
tools that provides this insight from AI
search platforms you you will see that
we'll go through a few of them and um we
need to validate first all right like
which are the the the LLMs that our
audience actually use um not all of them
use uh JGBT in necessarily or perplexity
or Gemini in the same way or in the
exact same share right so if you need to
allocate resources I need to prioritize
it's important to see which of these are
already bringing value and where is your
your standing with them right
identifying the most popular and
relevant queries and prompts used by
your audience to search for your
products or services and brand through
the customer journey also your current
content performance, the mentions, the
links, the sentiment versus competitors
for relevant queries, promps across this
AI platforms that you audience uses and
establishing your relevant queries and
promps and topics to target. Uh those
that are actually aligned to your
business that actually make sense to
target, not too broad, not too specific,
uh not too of topic as well. And the
first thing will be to use to leverage
um analytics, your analytics platform.
most of their use uh G4, Google
Analytics 4. Uh their interface has
evolved a lot in the last few years
since it was launched, but I still
dislike it and I I think it's still too
uh let's say um not ideal in order to
facilitate analysis. I really really
like to leverage uh Lucer Studio and
there's this dashboard here that you can
access here from the folks of Radian
that uh they they they made it available
for free that you can connect your uh
analytics data and directly see their
the AI traffic analytics per performance
the top pages that are being consumed
which are the the platforms that are
bringing more traffic and conversions as
well. uh you can see the events, the
sessions, the average conversion for
each one of them. So it it's
interesting. So you don't only see let's
say what uh the activity it is at a very
high level but go per section per area
or most of your audiences going
toformational content or commercial or
listing like what is the type of
information that they consume then we
can leverage thirdparty platforms like
similar web they have a very strong um
AI report uh they showcase and they are
able to showcase a benchmark of your
website versus comp compar competitors,
main players. Uh so you can compare the
top AI traffic platforms bringing you
traffic, AI traffic versus the ones of
your competitors. Maybe the one that is
bringing you traffic is Chipd, but all
of your other competitors are performing
so well in perplexity and bringing most
of their traffic and much more traffic
in Gemini or Perplexity. And then it
might be because something important to
take into account because maybe you u
take note and validate uh and assess
later on and identify that you are
blocking those uh chat bots right to not
seeing the content of your site. So it's
important to identify those gaps and and
opportunities. Then uh the tool also
provides you the top air traffic pages,
the ones that are bringing more air
traffic and the prompts the uh um um
just like a pretty much a sample of the
top prompts that are trigger each one of
uh this pages AI traffic. Of course, not
something completely comprehensive. This
this goes through also a filter to avoid
any uh showcasing any personalization
data. So what is important here is to
take that as a reference to identify and
validate alignment with the type of con
the the topics that you actually want to
address and already targeting and
covering. And what is more interesting
is that they allow you to do the same
with your competitors as well. So you
can see what is working very well with
them and not working as well for you yet
and opportunities of topics to to target
and new type of content to to create
too. Uh talk compare pages and prompts
as well. uh as I mentioned you can see
the evolution over time what is working
well what is increasing or not there is
another tool that is called profound uh
profan has a keyword research uh sort of
functionality that allows you to gauge
the popularity of a topic over time uh
in any of the different lams
Gemini perplexity etc and in which
countries the these are being searched
the most and again the top relevant
problems related related to that topic
and similar keywords, similar topics
that are semantically connected that
people are also using as well to give
you ideas or references to expand your
your research. There's another tool that
is called uh cysri that has also its own
AI model uh that allows you to do a
research for any topic and it will tell
you not only the top brands connected to
that topics in in LLM's uh answers that
are showcased the most but also uh
citation sources for each one of them
and the inclusion in in in most of them
and or or not and what are the gaps and
the opportunities. So this is um
research that I always do not only from
a topical standpoint um validating their
analysis there for the topics of my top
product lines or service lines of my of
my clients but also their brands the
brands versus the ones of their
competitors to gauge a little bit like
how they are um feature and the
sentiment of the the inclusions, right?
because many times yes they can be
included as as well but the mention of
their competitors might be positive and
there's negative so that is also not
good and important to to identify uh
then optimize for content crawability
and indexibility and for this you might
uh want to if you're not an SEO yourself
uh or technical SEO you might want to
ask a little bit for support however it
is fundamental because it's the base of
everything to allow uh AI system
crawlers to access your your information
and make sure that they can render that
they can see the content in your pages.
Um, and if you over rely on JavaScript
for it, that might not necessarily be
the case. So, the first thing to do is
to validate that you're blocking uh some
of these AI bots through not only the
robust txt, but maybe CDN or firewall or
hosting blocking uh blockage rules. Uh,
I actually found out by using this free
validator, this free tool that will tell
you if you're blocking and and what type
of blocking are you implementing to to
any of this AI bot crawlers. Um, that
one of the hostings that I use for some
of my sites were actually blocking by
default. Uh, most of the AI bots. And
when I when I asked, you can see here my
LinkedIn post, they were well, they gave
me all of this information that the the
the they they they were accessing
without um permission and using people's
content without permission and so on,
which by all means, I understand, but it
is important to provide um visibility to
this and to allow this like like website
owners and decision makers to make the
decision if to block it or not and to
make it easy to do it, right? And rather
than realizing it by using one of these
tools and then having to get in touch
with support, etc., etc., right? But
that was quickly solved and I was able
to to allow uh all of the AI boats to
see my my content again. Uh, and then
from a rendering standpoint, um, there
are like very easy to use free Chrome
extensions like the ones that I'm using
here that will tell you how much of your
content or your links or your
configurations rely on JavaScript to to
to be shown. And if you can see that
there's a important gap here, the the
the the content that is not shown in the
raw HTML and relies on JavaScript to be
shown will likely be invisible for AI
bots because unlike the Google bot, it
they don't have the capacity to render
JavaScript unfortunately yet. So you
might need you might need to uh pre
prioritize this work if it was something
that you had not necessarily uh
prioritize um because you you thought
that it was a word Google but
necessarily not anymore right there also
crawlers as your crawlers screaming frog
is a very popular the most popular ones
also uh if you need larger scale uh
cloud-based crawlers you have cybul as
well that they have this very easy to go
through um validation to understand what
relies on on JavaScript and what not.
They do a comparison of every single
area as well. When I asked about this by
the way um are you monitoring I bought
scrolls for your sites? Uh well a lot of
people still say no but but plan to
unfortunately but then uh another share
next. Uh yes yes for some of the sites I
work yes for all of most of the sites.
So this is good but yes there are still
quite a few people there that are are
not doing it and somes that are not are
not doing it and don't plan to which is
weird and but yes if they don't do it I
guess more opportunity for all all of us
do who do and are you auditing your site
content indexibility for AI search
platform you see in validating this um
JavaScript uh dependability let's say
and most of them have say yes right and
those who say no this like no but I am
planning to do that because is
definitely a must. Then establishing a
business online on brand topical
authority. This is something very very
important because I understand and I
know that a lot of decision makers with
um theformational
content losing traffic because of AI
overviews and LLMs I love the in effect
effects of of LLM opportunity have say
oh we don't need to createformational
content anymore let's focus on money
making more commercial content right but
with the because of the querify now
technique that I explained before it is
more important to create a uh topical
hubs, complete topical hubs that are
able to fulfill and and provide and seed
those comprehensive answers that LLMs
need. Um and it's better that we control
the narrative rather than well making
LLMs to rely on third party information
where the reviews from of of our
products or services might not
necessarily be as good, right? So uh it
is fundamental to create content that
goes through the full customer journey.
The key here is to make sure that this
content is on brand. It's not only about
targeting generic topics that are
popular
uh topics in search. No, this should be
content that should be meaningful from a
brand from a branding and business
online topics, right? to create
awareness uh to to help through the
decision making and to support also
postpurchase as well. There are tools
that can help us to prioritize this.
There are tools that have been released.
These two here are free and this will
allow to generate this query fan out sub
query, subtopics, keywords that I
mentioned before that LMS trigger or
generate in order to be able to identify
them and match with uh content chunks in
order to provide their answers. But of
course we can still use traditional uh
keyword tools like Samrush or also as to
identify different keywords variations
that uh are connected semantically with
any term any topic that we add. There is
this tool that is YK. They also provide
a premium access as well that they will
actually create a knowledge map of your
side and they will directly showcase the
theatic gaps and critical topics gaps in
order for you to fill based on the the
website analysis that they do. And of
course there are content optim
optimization tool content creation
optimization tool like the one of AF AI
content helper which they what they do
is to identify which are the which is
the angle that you're taking to address
what is the intent of your of your
content uh based on the best performing
content out there and the one that you
have. And then uh from a semantic
standpoint they highlight here and they
do it in a very visual way like what
which are the topics that you have
already covered with your content and
the one that still needs to be
addressed, right? Because maybe you're
you're targeting a topic from a
moreformational standpoint, but you're
you're not mentioning something very
very important that all of your other
competitors are already mentioning,
right? So there's certainly a gap and it
might be something very worthy for you
to do. As you can see, this is something
that supports the writer, doesn't
replace the writer. Of course, it's very
very important that uh the writer still
decides if it makes sense uh product
wise, business-wise and so on. Then we
have also tools like similar web that
again since they provide us the
information of the prompts, we can
double check there. Okay, what are what
are the top prompts for this uh pages
here that I can that are bringing more
traffic? the ones that actually are
moving the needle traffic-wise to
prioritize even further, right? And
based on that, you can create something
like this. I'd really like to provide
this as an example because REI are doing
pretty well. They are actually a
competitor of one of my clients and I I
see this every single time how they are
able to to be a very commercially
oriented um online retailer that will
tend to highly highly prioritize
transactional content, commercially
related content, but they integrate
informationational content very well in
their listings in in the category pages
with an expert advice tab. And of course
they already have their learn section,
their guide sections and and what they
do is to pretty much provide a
experience first expert oriented or
based uh guide for any of the product
lines that they feature on their online
store which shockingly is something that
a lot of online stores don't do because
they don't see how worthy it is. But
because of what I mentioned before, it's
very worthy to showcase that you are the
authority in a field targeting and
addressing uh a topic that you own a
topic uh and you are the authority of it
and are the source or should be the
source uh providing or showcasing all of
the answers of that topic like and then
uh the next step will be to optimize for
ch level retrieval. I'm pretty sure that
you have heard about this like the
passages that I mentioned before that
should be semantically tight and
self-contained. one idea per section.
Uh, keep each text passage tightly
focused on a single concept, well
structured using accessible and well
formatted HTML so it's easier to grab.
The thing is I have heard some crazy
theories about this out there like
literally I mean write for users h if
you are good writer if you know how to
structure well uh the content while
following this best practices let's say
that fac fac facilitate uh synthesis
then you should be good there have been
some tests here so for example Chris
Green tested a few ways to uh to format
to reformat uh the content and and Q&A
dense pros structure content what is
easier what performs better
realistically is that the difference is
not very high and at the end of the day
well this systems are sophisticated
enough to extract the information as
long as it makes sense and it's good for
users right uh there is another piece
that was published not so long ago uh a
couple of weeks ago from Href uh
mentioning how the best to way to
address this is to structure your
content for humans as well as AI with an
atomic content workflow. So it's is each
what I mentioned before each unit or
each paragraph or each section should be
um targeted or should be treated as a as
a standalone snippet. So is semantically
tied self-contained word where address
and here's a very simple example right a
good example is what is technical SEO
one clear concept what is technical SEO
self-contained and understandable
without needing all the sections uh self
uh structure with clear heading and
concise explanation and here's a bad
example learn but yes multiple concepts
jam into one paragraph not only
technical but l building and everything
all together lack of focus not
semantically tight heading is too
thought and doesn't guide uh chunk
retrieval, doesn't facilitate it and
require surrounding context to make
sense. Right now, if you have this as an
intro, no problem. You expand further,
but if this is only what you have
regarding the topic, so bad. Uh there is
another free tool that facilitates to
create chunks out of content that you
cop you can copy paste it all together
and they will create the structure and
content for you and the chunks for you.
you will see that this is this something
that you will do very naturally yourself
as if if you're a good writer as well,
right? So here here's here's the tool
though so you can double check and
validate it. But yes, it should be very
natural. Uh optimize for answer
synthesis and this has to do as well how
well structure your your content.
Summarize complex ideas clearly then
expand. So you can have a summary or key
takeaways at the beginning that's or at
the end that is always a a good
practice. uh star answers with direct
concise uh sentences uh favor plain
factual non-promotional tones as as well
uh rather than overhype and click baity
because uh LMS will tend to not site
that type of of information uh structure
data to help I models to better classify
and extract structure answer as well and
use natural language you can use Q&A
format as well here's another example
that you can see but it should be Well,
pretty much copyrightiting 101, right?
So, this well structure all of this and
because I I work with a lot of
e-commerce clients and and commercially
oriented clients, this something that I
usually try try to address to enrich
these pages in a way that is aligned to
this with FAQs, FAQs that are not fluff
that actually make sense and actually
address uh real questions and doubts at
that stage of the customer journey. And
I really like how now it's very common
to generate uh summaries of the all of
the reviews uh to provide an easy to
obtain reference of what is going on uh
with with the reviews if it is positive
or negative. And of course there are
tools like the ones that I'm showcasing
here on screen like phrase uh that helps
to uh provide a good structure on the
content provide input on that also
readability at the end of this this has
to do with readability as well right
then optimize your content for citation
worthiness and this has to do with make
your content what I mentioned before eat
uh experiencebased expertise showcasing
expertise authoritiveness and true
working as seniors should be showcased
Uh it should be up to date with
showcasing verifiable claims, factbased
state statements rather than back
generalities and of of course should be
if if possible, right? Like you should
feature the author a real organization
be behind because there's this brand and
antiiance that is also taken into
account uh include sources, citations
and so on. We can see that those top uh
brands that are showcased in each one of
the topics or industries are brands that
well they don't only sell and that's it.
They provide an accurate and
comprehensive experience with insights
that will showcase that they are real
experts and are worthy to to site.
Right? So Chiwi for example the online
store they have this all about pet
section with guides resources tools that
you can use and this is what people will
end up referring and citing and linking
right so you should make that very easy
by uh identifying analyzing from your
vertical from your top topics which are
the top brands websites that are
showcased as sources and for example
this is uh something that here in this
districts th those as well as profound
and at the page level for each one of
these domain which is which are the type
of pages that are being cited right and
what is what are the areas of the
content that are being cited so you you
can identify patterns and take those
into account in your own content and of
course I have a checklist here that I
created some time ago to help you to
make sure and validate that your content
follow this expertise and experience and
presentation and production that we know
search engines like that facilitate the
reward to assess that the content is
worthy and accurate and authoritative uh
enough to to to be endorsed and to be
referred. That doesn't change for sure.
Uh then of course we have tools again
like phrase that uh validate this or try
to automatize uh automate this and
facilitate your life accordingly when
you are writing content and you should
definitely use schema and there are
tools in order to do that uh or to
validate that easily like the validator
schema here to help you understand if
you have already implemented the
relevant structure data or not. Then
grow your content authoritiveness
third-party seniors, right? And this is
the popularity, the authority to the
third party that comes from optimizing
your brand presence across different
channels, social channels, forums, um
digital PR that you can do. Before it
was mostly links that we wanted to
attract in this case our citations. So
there are tools like similar webs that
offer you uh this very clear and really
nice view of where uh which are the top
domains that are being cited per topic.
So Reddit is one of them maybe are you
are you working with your social media
team to work on that. Then Sparuro
allows you to see where the audience of
each topic hands out online. If it is uh
LinkedIn, if it is Instagram, if it is
Reddit, so you can collaborate
accordingly. um and and which are
actually the LLMs that refer more
traffic about this topic. So you can
collaborate accordingly with your
broader digital marketing team as well
and and yes more signals where where the
traffic in your sector is coming and
features from similar web for example
address that and of course optimizing
for multimodel support. This is this
image optimization, video optimization.
Uh making sure that these are indexable
that these are quickly load whenever you
need that there are no broken images
that you have all description that are
very very specific and relevant as well.
So accessibility also plays a role here
that you make sure that these images and
videos are accessible as well and have
good caption and so on. And of course
optimizing for personalization resilient
content. This is the fact that LLMs will
suggest brands uh uh mention brands that
they have you have already showed that
you like previously. And so my my
recommendation here is like try to
tackle and try to craft information that
allows you to connect with the user in
many different ways. So when it is later
in the journey again uh it will you will
have much more chances to being
showcased in in there as well. And
finally to monitor your content I search
performance. I have a to-do here uh that
ideally you will be able to do uh uh to
follow to assess your audience search
behavior the presence versus competitors
to monitor your AI search traffic
activity the crawling and indexing and
tools here again to do it. So the Lucer
Studio dashboard that I showed you
before, a tool that is called SEO
testing that I think that they have also
premium access. So you can segment and
see the evolution of your AI traffic and
how it converts and performs over time.
Similar web again you can monitor quite
easily your brand versus competitors.
Try profound and profound also the exact
same thing there. There's a variety of
these tools out there for you to to use.
And just to show you when I ask about uh
if people are already doing it in in SEO
or AI search, yes, they are already
monitoring content performance. In most
cases, they they take uh into account AI
search uh traffic as well as brand and
visibility I mentioned, but there's
still room and opportunity because some
answers were not necessarily positive,
right?
As you can see, by assessing all of
these key AI search optimization areas,
you will now be able to prioritize
actions for a positive ROI. Uh it's
about aligning and prioritizing your AI
optimization efforts with your existing
SEO initiatives uh to high impact as
well. Most say that AI search still
brings less than 5% of the site revenue
when I ask while for most traditional
search still brings more than 50%. And
so it's important to take that into
account to prioritize accordingly.
However, most decision makers have
already allocated budget because it is
understood that it is very small right
now still but it is growing uh but not
as an independent channel. uh and all of
this based on our research and outlet
which is reasonable as well and highly
recommended and at the end of the day
most have expanded their SEO accordingly
to integrate in AI search optimization
within their SEO process not as a
completely new um department or area
because as you can see it doesn't make
sense everything is connected and SEO
principles are there as well h but they
do have their own AI search strategy
which makes sense so if you want to take
this step as Well, uh, you can download
the AI search optimization check for
free here that I created in a Google
sheet. And you can learn more about AI
search optimization with free reliable
resources from learning.com, which is a
website that I created as well. And you
can keep up with the latest search news
by subscribing to the free SEO for
newsletter. That is my weekly newsletter
that have a latest AI search insight
section as you can see here. And well,
now I finally finished. I hope that you
have found all of this insights uh
informative and interesting. I'm more
than happy to answer a couple of
questions as well in case uh there are a
few key ones that are important to to
tackle.
>> Yeah, Lena, thanks so much. That was so
much useful information and you
presented it so well. So, thank you for
that. Are you able to go another 10
minutes because we do have a couple of
questions. Okay. Okay. So, for everyone,
we'll go another 10 minutes for
questions. I believe Andy has one and
then we'll do Christine next.
>> Yep. Hi. Um, so I host my website on
WordPress and I use RankMath for a lot
of my SEO stuff. Um, I have been in the
process of creating an LLM.txt file. I
don't think you mentioned that. Is that
something you would recommend or what's
your viewpoint on that?
>> Thank you for bringing that up. uh
Google uh has particularly said that we
shouldn't waste our efforts on creating
lens txt files because at least for them
that is a solve problem right however
that might not necessarily be the case
for other platforms like GPT but they
have they haven't confirmed not specify
anywhere that they are actually using it
so my recommendations and and then there
there have been also cases of OS uh that
have been testing them. They they they
have created it and monitor how many uh
uh bots have actually access uh to them
and uh in some cases the the they have
proof that they are accessing this
files. However, we don't know
necessarily if that influence at all the
answers yet because we haven't gotten at
least at that point yet. So my
recommendation will be if it takes a lot
of time and efforts to create it don't
do it but if you just want to test and
validate then it's great. that all the
much um easier I believe and align with
the already existing SEO uh activities
ways to ensure that you are showcased um
in in answers if you want to be a little
bit more cost effective let's say so I I
wouldn't necessarily prioritize it
because of it
>> yeah it rank math just has literally a
button you just push the button and it
creates the file for you so it didn't
seem like it took too long so but I just
didn't if it was, you know, so from a
time perspective, I don't think that's
an issue, but I just was wondering what
your kind of thoughts on it were. So,
thank you very much. This was great.
>> Welcome.
>> All right. The next question is from
Christine. The question is, "What are
your thoughts on creating designs or
page components to optimize for search,
for example, having a special summary
design instead of using headings,
paragraphs, and lists.
So if it's it's great if it is also
helpful uh to your readers let's say I
hope that you are not taking things
let's say that you you have already
validated and you already know that are
useful and relevant and make sense from
a structure standpoint you just to add
extra fluff right so for example I
remember that back in the day when uh it
it was shown that For example, a lot of
guides or blog posts that had the the
index the the talk at the at the top
that was generated for example with
WordPress by default everybody and their
mother included it and showcasing in
some cases didn't make sense and it only
added a little bit of fluff at the top
and make it harder for the user to
scroll and see the actual content. So
from a um an intense standpoint it
didn't make the the experience better.
So and and then funnily enough when the
uh one of the updates from Google came a
few years back in which a lot of these
sort of blogs ended up getting uh or
losing their their their visibility then
a lot of people say oh it was because of
that talk like let's eliminate it. So I
I I don't want that we chase little
tactics like that if we if they don't
actually makes the experience better. So
I will say that whatever you want to do
or extract from this recommendations
that should be like the threshold or the
validation right um is does this make
sense
for the customer journey and makes my
experience better uh and doesn't add
fluff or an experience that is not
natural right like um the in in in SEO
also content um optimization side a
little bit. We saw a lot again in the
past uh blog post and guides
in the in the recipe se uh area or or
sector, right? That because they wanted
to make they saw that the very
comprehensive longer guides ended up
ranking better at some point. they ended
up featuring like very long stories and
anecdotes about how this recipe came to
be and it didn't provide a a great
experience because because the the
actual insight was buried at the very
end, right? So always think about that
as long as you provide a good experience
and it align it aligns with what the
user came to do then great uh do it. if
not better better to find a way to to do
it in a in a in a way that is aligned
with a good UX.
>> Excellent. So, let's do two more
questions. Selena, I think I know the
answer to this, but Selena asks, "Does a
website make sense for B2B anymore?"
>> If a website makes sense for the B2B,
>> yeah, like like having a website.
>> Yes. Yes. Yes. Of course. Yes. So, I I I
I understand where where is this coming
from? Like a year ago, I went to a
creators um um event and it blew my mind
to see that the younger generation, they
didn't even had a blog. They they they
had an Instagram and Tik Tok or YouTube
channel and that was it. Right? So, it
depends on who your audience is. And for
that, for example, take a look at the
the tool that I showed you, the Spartro
or similar web. It can cost a little bit
more but if you have resources it would
show um where the traffic is coming the
traffic refers where are the the
platforms where where uh people from
that sector actually spend time offline
and engage online and and uh it might be
worthy to expand your presence in third
party uh platforms. However, my my take
is always to own your own brand and and
avoid having all of your eggs in third
party um platforms uh as well and
diversify and for that even if you want
to maximize your visibility in this
third party platforms. I will always
always advi advise to own your brand
because at the end of the day there you
have full control of your narrative of
what you sell and to set things straight
if you need etc etc and a main source of
of of information for LMS as well and to
be able to rank in in in Google as well.
So yes, so it's interesting, but most of
a lot of my my clients are B2B. I have a
um a client that has to do with actually
AI automations. Uh another one that is a
a platform for online payments that is
only for all the businesses. It's not
for the the normal person, but it's very
targeted towards B businesses too. So
yeah, there are plenty of sectors B2B
sectors where it it makes sense uh
business-wise to to have their own
website and I will I will argue that
from a marketing standpoint it will
always be for for the better even if the
transaction doesn't end up happening
either.
So I have a question and we'll make this
the last question. Uh so for SEO we have
things like GA and Google search console
that can very specifically measure the
the impact of our SEO efforts. Uh so
what exists today in in GEO to measure
your efforts? So you go through your
10step checklist but how do you know
it's making a difference? Thank you very
much because actually unfortunately yet
and this is something that I have
requested quite a few times to the
Google spoke people um
that they showcase this information in
Google search console the one coming
from Gemini the one coming they do have
uh AI overviews and AI mode in their
current Google search console but it's
all blended and um they should have at
least a filter in order to segment to
better understand then we we we give a
very hard time at least in SEO to Google
asking for more uh information and data
but chipd haven't move a finger uh in
that regard and that will be something
nice that they do eventually right just
to better understand how uh our
experience is our brand experiences in
their answers right now the tools that
we can leverage are the ones that I that
I showcase uh in the presentation one
hand analytics as well segment ing the
the channel the AI channel and then on
the other hand this third party
platforms that unfortunately have a cost
like similar web or perplexity um cyrix
as well these are great tools I will say
uh that are very complete that also
provide prom information but yes
unfortunately this is this is a
challenge that we have right now and
it's not up to us but the platforms
themselves
>> got it and then Mark added to my
question uh In response to my question,
I think you would need to analyze your
own website logs for that kind of info.
AI is a great log analyzer.
So, thank you, Mark.
>> Yeah, indeed. But you do have to set up
the web log correctly. And I don't know
that most people do that with their
hosting provider, you know, but you can
capture a lot of information such as the
um you know the the header uh that
identifies
um who's looking, you know, what
browsers and such all that basic
information that you see in Google
Analytics. But if GA's not and I
checked, I validated what she just said.
If Google's not tracking um AI bots yet,
then we we have to at least look at our
logs and gain some information from that
for now.
>> Yeah, if you if you're using also CDNs
for example, like Cloudflare, they have
really great by default reports that
allows you to to to see this quite quite
easily as well.
>> And one last thing, Elena, if folks are
interested in contacting you or perhaps
hiring you, what's the best way for them
to to uh reach out to you? Yeah, they
can search for Alida in in Google. I'm
the first one. H very easy. I don't have
such a common name. Uh but yes, they can
search for search for me there.
Alida.com as well orient.com is my
consultancy. Um they can look for me in
LinkedIn where I am very active as well.
>> Excellent. Well, thanks so much for
joining Ala and thanks everyone for
attending. We'll see you next time.
>> Thank you very much. Bye-bye. Bye-bye.